[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Have you
ever had a dream that
seems impossible to achieve,
a dream so big and so far away
from your current reality
that you wouldn't even
imagine speaking it?
Well, this was the case
with Tererai Trent.
She grew up in a time
of unspeakable poverty
in sub-Saharan Africa
when young girls
were forced to marry
at 14 years old,
and have babies, and
remain illiterate.
Her unspeakable dream
was to gain an education
to break the cycle of poverty in
her family and in her village.
And today, Dr. Tererai Trent
is one of the most recognized
voices for quality education
and women's empowerment.
She has changed the lives of
generations of girls and women
forever.
I am honored.
>>TERERAI TRENT: Thank
you for having me.
>>LISA: I have chills just in
saying all that I just said.
You have done so much.
So much.
You just came from Zimbabwe
right here to be on our show.
>>TRENT: Yeah.
I arrived yesterday.
But you know, while I recognized
all the work that I have done,
but I stand on the shoulders
of many, many individuals.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>TRENT: I couldn't
have done what
I am doing without
the many angels that
are out there that have
looked into my eyes,
saw something that I never
saw, and believed in my dreams.
>>LISA: Isn't that beautiful?
>>TRENT: Yeah.
>>LISA: Yes.
And we all need that.
We cannot do this alone,
anything we're doing.
Take me back to when you
were growing up in Zimbabwe.
What was your life like?
>>TRENT: You know,
it's interesting,
because I always
talk about coming
from this long line of
generations of women who
had been married very young
before they could define
their own dreams.
I was born in a country
that was known as Rhodesia.
And today we are
known as Zimbabwe.
And we were the last country
to gain our independence.
So I grew up during the war, the
war that liberated my country.
And what I remember
most is in the evening,
I would sit with my grandmother,
my mother, and other women
around an open fire and
listen to these great stories,
heroic stories of
women surviving
in a war-torn country, but women
who despite the fact that they
were illiterate, but they were
the sheroes and the heroes
of the community.
>>LISA: They had to
have endured so much.
>>TRENT: Yes.
>>LISA: And to that circle
of sisterhood is unbreakable.
>>TRENT: It is.
It is, because,
collectively, when women--
when we come together and
we believe in a vision,
we can heal the world.
I talk about women.
We are the matriarchs.
We are the healers.
We are the wisdom
whisperers, the ones
who keep the community memory.
>>LISA: I read your book.
And I was reading about
these women's circles.
And I felt like I
was a part of it.
And the stories that your
grandmother would tell,
then your mother
would tell them.
And it was real though.
It was real about how you--
you had to cope
with this situation
you were in in some way.
Was this a way to help you cope?
>>TRENT: Yes, in many ways,
because I grew up with both
my grandmother and my mother.
They would always say
it's not your past that's
going to define
who you are but it
is the dream, and the
vision, and the expectations
of yourself that's going
to create that destiny.
You know, I talk about
when I was 18 years of age,
I was already a mother of four.
And one of the babies
died as an infant
because I failed to
produce enough milk.
I was a child myself.
I was just following
the same pathway
that generations of women
before me had traveled.
My great-grandmother
was married off
when she was very
young, before she
could define their own dreams.
My grandmother went through
the same and my mother.
And I knew that I needed
to change my life.
I always talk about I always
visualize my great-grandmother
when she was born,
because all these women
that I'm talking about, we
were all exchanged for a cow,
because it's part of what
they call the culture.
And my grandmother would always
say, no, it's not the culture.
It's a custom.
>>LISA: There's a different.
>>TRENT: There's a difference.
Culture is all-loving.
It's all-embracing.
>>LISA: Right.
>>TRENT: But a custom,
like the way in America
you build a custom made house.
Someone has to sit
and say this is
how I want to design my house.
Someone had to sit and say
this is how we can have women.
We can marry young.
We can do all these things
because that's custom.
Culture is beautiful.
>>LISA: Help me understand
the custom, if you could.
I would like to understand
what is the custom that women
need to marry young.
What was the situation with
the exchange and the poverty?
Explain this to me.
>>TRENT: Because we grew up--
I grew up during the war.
We were pretty much
oppressed and marginalized
by the colonial system
that was in place, removed
from fertile lands into
agricultural lands that
were not even fertile.
And there was a lot of poverty
that was shaped by that.
And as a mechanism
to survive, the men
would find employment
in factories and mines.
And the women would remain
home taking care of kids.
So there was a
disparity that was
being shaped because men would
then get education because they
are the breadwinners.
They would bring income.
And girls, what do you do?
You are there to be married.
And a lot of girls were being
married very young before they
could even get an education.
That was the era
where I was growing.
And so when I talk
about my grandmother,
my great-grandmother, she
was also married young.
And I always visualize
my great-grandmother
when she was born.
She was born into this relay.
And I call that the
relay of poverty.
And she's running
holding this baton.
And I carry that
baton wherever I go.
She has this baton.
And she ran so fast
with this baton.
This is the baton
of early marriage,
the baton of illiteracy, the
baton of the colonial system
that never valued her.
She ran so fast with this
baton, my great-grandmother.
She hands it over to my mother--
to my grandmother.
My grandmother grips
that baton of illiteracy,
poverty, early marriage.
She runs with that baton.
She hands it over to my mother.
My mother grips that baton,
the baton of illiteracy.
She ran with that baton.
She hands it over to me.
And I say it's not my race.
It's not my baton.
I need to shift and
redefine this baton
so I don't have to
pass it on to my girls.
>>LISA: Yes.
What made you say that?
>>TRENT: Because my
mother and my grandmother,
they would always
say, Tererai, now we
have gained independence.
You have more choices.
You don't have to pass on
this ugly baton to your girls.
It's not your past that's
defining who you are.
And so I took that as
a moral responsibility,
because my grandmother
would always
tell the story of great hunger.
>>LISA: Yes.
The great hunger versus
the small hunger, yes.
>>TERERAI: And there are two
kinds of hungers in our lives.
There is the little hunger.
The little hunger is all
about immediate gratification.
I want that, I want it now.
But the great hunger, which
is the greatest of all hunger
is in our lives, its hunger
for meaning in our life.
So I knew I needed
meaning in my life.
Despite the fact that I had
been married when I was young,
I had all these babies.
And now we are in an
independent country.
I needed to change
so we don't continue
to pass the ugly baton
to the next generation.
>>LISA: You create a whole
other level of dreams.
>>TERERAI: Yes.
>>LISA: Which was what--
back to the women's circle,
back to the circle, when you're
a grandmother and your mother
spoke of dreams--
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
>>LISA: Of goals, it
lit a fire in you.
>>TERERAI: Oh, it did, it did.
Because when we gained
independence, all of a sudden
in our communities we
begin to see Americans,
Australians, these women
who looked like they
were so empowered.
And they would always
come carrying their bags
and wearing glasses.
And I would observe these
women, they would pick something
from their bag, like
a booklet, and they
would wear those glasses and
they would talk to each other,
put back those glasses.
And I would always
think wearing glasses
was a sign of education.
And I needed that.
So this one woman,
her name was Jo Luck,
she came and found me with
other women sitting in a circle
and asked one question that no
one had asked me in my life.
What are your dreams?
What are your hopes?
And I am looking at
this woman, and I'm
thinking, me, Tererai,
black woman, marginalized,
running with my own ugly baton.
How am I suppose to dream?
>>LISA: To dream, yeah, yeah.
>>TERERAI: And she said yes,
if you believe in your dreams,
they are achievable.
And I said, I want
to go to America.
I want to have an undergraduate.
I want to have a master's.
And I want to have a PhD.
There was silence.
>>LISA: You knew all
of that in that moment.
It just came out of you.
>>TERERAI: Because all along,
when we gained independence,
local students from urban
areas, from the university,
they would come
to our communities
and they would talk
about these degrees.
Even the American women, some of
them were doing their research,
they would talk about these
degrees, undergraduate,
master's, PhD,
and I wanted that.
So the first dream
of going to America
was inspired by Jo
Luck, this woman.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>TERERAI: Because
there was something
about these American
women, the way they walked,
the way they carried themselves.
I could see dignity.
The way they looked right into
your eyes, whereas we poor
women who had been
silenced by early marriage,
we would never look right into
your eyes, were always quiet.
And I wanted that dignity.
So I when I told her that, she
said yes, it is achievable.
>>LISA: It is achievable.
And you heard that.
>>TERERAI: Yeah She used
the word [NON-ENGLISH]..
In my language, it
means it is achievable.
Oh.
That inspired me.
That's all I wanted.
>>LISA: That's all you needed.
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
As a poor mother, to hear
another woman looking
into my eyes and say, yes,
your dreams are achievable.
We are social animals.
We need one another.
We need another
woman who can say,
you can stand on my
shoulders and you
can achieve your dreams.
I ran into my mother.
I said I met someone who
made me believe in my dreams.
My mother looked at me, and
I think my mother saw hope.
>>LISA: Ah, oh, the first time.
>>TERERAI: For the first
time, she saw hope.
>>LISA: Yes, yes.
>>TERERAI: And she
said, if you believe
in what this stranger is saying
to you and you work hard,
and let's say you
achieve your dreams,
not only are you defining
who you are as a woman,
but you're also
defining every life that
comes out of your womb
and generations to come.
>>LISA: From every other woman.
You would-- you're so blessed
to have had a mother like that.
She could have said, no,
look at your circumstances.
You're never going
to get out of this.
Nobody ever has.
But she was a
pinnacle part of that.
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
>>LISA: She knew what to say.
And that's sometimes
the challenge
that we have when
we see poor people.
We think they are so poor
they can't think beyond what's
here, despite the fact--
I work with many
communities that are poor,
but they want a better
life for themselves
and for their children.
>>LISA: They don't
want a poor life.
>>TERERAI: No.
>>LISA: That is not a dream.
>>TERERAI: No, no.
>>LISA: The dream is
to break out of that.
But you also need to
want to do it yourself.
You had that.
>>TERERAI: I wanted
to change my life.
>>LISA: So you used to
read your brother's books.
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
So when my brother
was going to school--
>>LISA: And the boys
got to go to school.
>>TERERAI: The boys, they were--
they had to go to school.
And my brother,
for some reasons,
he never wanted to go to school.
>>LISA: Oh, that must
have bothered you.
>>TERERAI: It did.
So he would come--
one day I remember
he came home with this book
and he called it geography.
And I'm like, geography.
I opened that book and I saw
pictures and I saw words.
I cried.
I wanted to know
what these words were
saying about these pictures.
And I said to my
brother, help me read.
He said, OK, I will.
>>LISA: He did.
>>TERERAI: But you
will pay for it.
>>LISA: Oh.
>>TERERAI: And I had no idea
how I was going to pay for it.
So he would teach me how to read
by making me practice vowels
and alphabets and he would
see there's the Mrs. Vowel
and there is the Mr. Alphabet.
You need to marry these two.
>>LISA: OK.
>>TERERAI: So he would teach
me amai, which is mother.
So I would look at
the vowels, there's A.
And he would say, now
look to the alphabets.
You'll find M, M, go back, find
A. Amai, and there's the I.
And that's how I learned
it, like I was sewing words.
And before long I was
able to read and write.
My brother says, can
you do my homework?
[LAUGHTER]
>>LISA: That was the payment.
And you were happy to do.
>>TERERAI: I was happy
to do it, but my writing
wasn't that good, so
the teacher discovered
that it wasn't my brother
doing the homework, it was me.
And he advocated
for me, so when I
talk about standing on
the shoulders of many--
>>LISA: Fantastic.
>>TERERAI: He came and
convinced my father
and I would end
up going to school
and got my little
bit of education.
I was already an
older student by then.
So when I--
>>LISA: You were eager.
>>TERERAI: I was, I was eager.
I remember going to school
with no shoes, with nothing.
I never cared.
Even when I came to America, I
was always the oldest student
in every class that I
attended, sometimes older
than the professor
herself or himself.
But I never cared,
because I knew
I was on a journey to break this
cycle, the vicious cycle that
runs deep within my family.
>>LISA: That is so much--
>>TERERAI: To change that baton.
>>LISA: So much deeper than
just getting an education.
You had a mission and
a journey and a dream
and you were going
to achieve it.
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
>>LISA: One person told
you it was possible
and you believed it.
>>TERERAI: Yes.
Sometimes we need
that one person.
>>LISA: Well, also need
to have that belief in you
that it ignited.
And your journey,
how long did it
take you to get to the PhD
level, which is phenomenal?
>>TERERAI: Oh my
goodness, 20 years.
>>LISA: 20 years.
>>TERERAI: 20 years.
>>LISA: You didn't give up?
>>TERERAI: No, I never gave up.
Because when I told my
mother about my dreams,
that I had discussed
with Jo Luck, she said,
write down those
dreams and bury them.
The word bury and plant
are the same in my culture.
Bury them, bury your dreams
deep down under the ground
the same way we bury
the umbilical cord.
I come from a culture
where when a child is
born the female
elders of the village,
they take the mother's old dress
and they take a small piece.
They cut the baby's
umbilical cord,
tie that umbilical cord
in this piece of dress,
bury it deep down
under the ground,
with the belief that when this
child grows, wherever they go,
whatever happens in their life,
the umbilical cord will always
remind them of
their birth place.
Rituals are important
in our lives.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>TERERAI: They
ground our faith.
My mother said, bury your dreams
deep down under the ground.
Wherever you go, despite
the abuse in your life,
despite the poverty
in your life,
those dreams will always
remind you of their importance,
that you're needed to
redefine the ugly baton.
So I had my four dreams.
>>LISA: Well, you were--well,
through this journey, that is--
first of all, tradition
is so, so vital.
We've lost so much of
that in this country.
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
>>LISA: And that's so
beautiful, because the dream
will grow and remember where it
came from, where its roots are.
>>TERERAI: It does.
>>LISA: And you
probably needed that,
because as I read in your book,
you were challenged through
your whole education by the
husband who did not want you
to--
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
>>LISA: --to do that.
>>TERERAI: Yeah, but the
fact that I had my dreams
buried deep down,
that gave me hope.
That give me grounding.
>>LISA: That's the
true meaning of hope.
>>TERERAI: Whenever
I needed to give up,
I would always think
about those dreams
that I knew were growing.
>>LISA: You have quite
a destiny, my friend.
>>TERERAI: Thank you.
>>LISA: It just
comes through you.
Have you ever thought about
that, about why you're here
and what your real,
true purpose is
and how it was this
purpose all along?
>>TERERAI: You know,
when you listen
to the Native Americans
in this country,
they say humankind has
not woven the web of life.
We are but one thread within it.
Whatever we do to the web,
we do it to ourselves.
All things are bound together.
All things are connected.
Our very survival is connected
to the survival of others.
I knew from my grandmother
that we are not
scattered here on earth just
for the sake of just being here.
We came here on
earth for a purpose.
We have to find our purpose.
And that's why I talk
about the great hunger
by asking what breaks my heart.
It is in those moments
of our brokenness,
in those moments when
we dig deep within us,
we begin to find a
stirring leading us
to our purpose in this life.
Because collectively we
can change the world.
The silencing of one woman
is our collective silencing.
But the awakening of women, it
is the healing of the world.
We can heal the world
by finding our purpose.
>>LISA: And not just
a single soul purpose.
It has to be, as your mother
said, collectively interwoven.
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
>>LISA: And help the community.
>>TERERAI: I remember
when I had my four dreams,
to go to America, to
get an undergraduate,
to get a master's,
get a PhD, and I
was ready to bury those dreams,
when my mother said something
so profound that just
changed my whole life.
Your dreams will
have greater meaning
when they are tied to the
betterment of your community.
It's not only about our
personal goals in life
or the personal
financial goals in life,
but it is about how
our personal goals are
connected to the greater good.
That's the secret
to our success.
Because that's what
makes us human beings.
>>LISA: Yeah.
There isn't any other way.
>>TERERAI: No.
>>LISA: No.
>>LISA: And I don't
know that it would even
be successful any other way.
>>TERERAI: No.
>>LISA: It has to be this way.
>>TERERAI: It has to be.
>>LISA: You have, in
this current day and age,
as we speak, this is still
occurring in your hometown.
>>TERERAI: Exactly.
>>LISA: Girls are married young.
>>TERERAI: Yes, yes,
because of poverty.
We still have girls that
are getting married young.
We still have families
accepting cows as a bride price.
We still have that.
>>LISA: We do.
>>TERERAI: But when we
educate a community,
we change the narrative.
And that's the
reason why today, I
am doing whatever I can
to make sure that we
educate this generation.
We educate both boys and girls.
>>LISA: And this was what
Oprah saw when she was--
when she took to your
story and started
to explain to the world, this
is what is currently happening.
>>TERERAI: Yeah, yeah.
>>LISA: And it's so
true that the awareness,
in our Western world,
we're not necessarily
being broadcast those images
or told those stories.
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
>>LISA: And it was so important
to have that information.
And what was this moment like/
I want to show you the video
first, and then I want to
ask you about this moment.
Take a look at this.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>> I have been so
moved by your story.
Your story is at the core
of everything I believe,
and the possibility of a
human life here on earth.
And for that reason,
I am going to help
you rebuild your school.
I'm donating a million
and a half dollars--
[CHEERING]
I'm donating $1.5 million to--
[LAUGHTER]
And I want you to--
I want you to have help doing
it, because I know it's hard.
Save the Children is going
to spend three years working
with teachers and
children and parents
in the area to improve
literacy and basic education.
So ultimately, 4,000 children
will have a better education
because of you.
[APPLAUSE]
We're going to build
a school together.
We are going to build a school.
>> And it is achievable.
[CHEERING]
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: Oh, that
moment, that moment.
>>TERERAI: Oh my goodness.
>>LISA: You looked
like you were in shock.
>>TERERAI: I never
saw that coming,
because when I got
invited to come back,
the producers said
this is not the time
to be talking about your
dreams and what have you.
You're just coming
in because Oprah
is coming to the
end of her season
and she is just
inviting everybody.
It's just like a get
together, so it's not
like you're going to go
to Oprah and say this
is my dream, no, no, no, no.
Remember, you are a guest.
And the producer was
very clear about that.
And so when I arrived at
the studios I was like,
I'm just going for a get
together party or something.
And then all of a sudden they
are saying, we are going--
look at those double doors .
We are going to count.
As soon as we say 10,
they are going to open
and you are going to
walk in and join others.
So I walked in thinking I'm
joining others who are already
into this get together party.
And gosh, I see Oprah standing
there with her arms wide open.
And she said
something, you're going
to go in history as
my favorite guest.
And I'm like, what
is this again?
And we sit down and she's
asking, what are your dreams?
And I'm thinking, the producer
said I shouldn't say something.
But then I said, this
is an opportunity.
I'm not going to keep quiet.
I'm reclaiming my voice.
And I told her about
building schools.
>>LISA: Oh.
Amazing.
>>TERERAI: And she said I
am donating $1.5 million.
Gosh, I almost peed in my pants.
[LAUGHTER]
>>LISA: Your moment was--
>>TERERAI: Ah, ah,
even up to now it--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>TERERAI: It really
gives me chills.
>>LISA: I can see.
>>TERERAI: All I could think
of was, my mother was right.
To include that fifth
dream, number five,
to give back to your community.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>TERERAI: That's
the sacred dream.
That's all I could think of,
because without that dream
I don't think Oprah would
have done what she did.
And I don't think I'd
even be sitting here.
The human connection
is very important.
>>LISA: It is.
It's the fabric of life.
It is so important.
And I want you to share
with us the results
of that incredible--
>>TERERAI: Oh my goodness.
>>LISA: The building,
the children,
the education that began.
>>TERERAI: Oh my goodness.
You know, before this
funding, the school
that I attended was
built long, long time
ago during the colonial
system, the colonial era.
No child from that school
had gone to university.
And now, with this
partnership with Oprah,
now we have 11 schools.
>>LISA: Oh my goodness.
>>TERERAI: Now we have 38,000
kids going through the school
system.
We have students--
I just came back from Zimbabwe.
We have students
that are now enrolled
in our local universities.
Unheard of.
Their parents are
illiterate, poor,
and they can't even
wrap around the fact
that their girls are
going to university.
It's unbelievable, the power
of believing in our dreams.
>>LISA: Yes.
And the collectiveness that
strengthens our humanity.
>>TERERAI: Exactly.
>>LISA: That is so key.
>>TERERAI: It is.
>>LISA: Their mothers
must be so proud.
>>TERERAI: Oh, they are, because
they realize these girls are
breaking that cycle--
>>LISA: Yes.
>>TERERAI: --of poverty.
>>TERERAI: And that's
what makes me so happy.
>>LISA: So the
education that they
receive then enables them to
have a trade, a technique.
>>TERERAI: Exactly.
>>LISA: Further, this beautiful
necklace that I'm wearing--
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
>>LISA: --is in support
of these incredible women.
And I can feel--
>>TERERAI: Their mothers,
I said one of the things
that I needed to do-- because
when you empower, economically
empower a mother, she is more
likely to empower her daughter.
And so we started
creating, I started
creating this employment
platform for the mothers
to come in and make jewelry.
They may be illiterate,
poor, but they have skills.
So they started putting
on this beautiful jewelry
to sell so they can pay
tuitions for their girls.
It brings them more joy.
>>LISA: Everything, it's
completely full circle.
>>TERERAI: Oh my goodness, yeah.
>>LISA: And now you
have the first group
that has gone to university.
>>TERERAI: Yeah, yeah.
We have the first
group and we even
have one student
who's doing medicine
at the University of Algeria.
And we have one student who
graduated about a year ago,
and now we have
these 11 going in
and next year we are
expecting about 20
going in, because we have
created these role models.
When they go to the
communities with their books
and say we are taking
undergraduate programs,
oh my goodness.
>>LISA: And they come
back to the communities.
>>TERERAI: Oh yeah.
>>LISA: With their
books and their glasses.
>>TERERAI: Yes, yes, yes, yes.
With a different walk,
you know, dignity,
showing that they are no
more silenced as young women.
They are not going to go
into these early marriages.
That's all I have
always wanted to do.
>>LISA: And they bring a whole
new way of bringing money
into the families.
It's not a cow anymore.
It's a skill.
It's a trade.
>>TERERAI: Exactly.
>>LISA: It's an education.
>>TERERAI: And it's dignity.
>>LISA: And it's dignity,
is what it really is.
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
>>LISA: And it's re-educating
an entire generation.
>>TERERAI: Oh, yeah.
>>LISA: And so on.
And now there are statistics
that we hear of all the time,
55% of women in the region of
Africa are attending school.
There's these
statistics, but they grow
and they change
every single day.
>>TERERAI: They do, they do.
And especially when you
focus and educate more girls,
you change the whole generation.
There's power in that.
In our schools, they
are public schools,
we educate both boys and girls.
But what has been
fascinating for me
is to see girls
outperforming boys.
And I am-- and they
are so determined.
>>LISA: Like you were.
>>TERERAI: Yes.
I think it's because, also,
they see me in the community.
At least they can see a
role model and they can say,
I want to be just like her.
And I've seen older men coming,
holding their eight-year-old
daughters and looking into
my eyes and say, Tererai,
can she be just like you?
And I realize in those moments
that not only are we providing
quality education, but we
are helping communities
to transform in seeing the
importance of educating girls
as well.
>>LISA: Yes, and
to break the cycle.
>>TERERAI: Exactly.
>>LISA: That they don't
want for their daughters.
>>TERERAI: No.
>>LISA: Now can I ask you
your personal practice?
Do you find
inspiration every day?
Do you meditate?
Do you--
>>TERERAI: Oh.
>>LISA: --pray?
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
>>LISA: Visualize?
>>TERERAI: Every day,
because I grew up
with a grandmother who
said it's important for you
to own your own rituals,
because rituals, they ground us.
They provide that space
to grow our faith.
So every day, 4:00
AM, I have to be up
and I do what I
call fierce writing.
I write and I write anything
that comes to my mind.
And I'm finding it is in those
hours where I am more creative.
I visualize every day.
When I buried my
dreams, my grandmother
would say go to that place where
you have buried your dreams,
sit still, visualize as
though you're already
living that life.
And I would visualize myself
getting into an aeroplane,
coming to America.
I'd never seen an aeroplane,
I'd never been in an aeroplane.
The only aeroplane that I
knew were war helicopters
that would come into
the communities.
So I would find myself
sitting into that helicopter.
It would take me to this
place called America.
And I would visualize
these tall buildings
and see myself carrying
books and attending classes.
Visualize getting my
undergraduate, my master's,
and my PhD.
Visualize going back,
building schools.
Visualize little girls
attending schools
and gaining their education.
The day that I went
into that aeroplane,
there was this deja vu feeling
that I've been here before.
So the power of daily rituals
is important in my life.
I talk about rituals, I
breathe rituals, I am rituals.
>>LISA: They are so important,
and a lost art here.
And thank you for reminding us.
Now do you visualize going back
to your community and teaching?
Do you visualize new dreams now?
>>TERERAI: I live in Zimbabwe.
I had lived in this
country for almost 20 years
and relocated back
to my country.
I work in the communities
and I am in Zimbabwe--
I just came here yesterday.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>TERERAI: Yes.
What is now my next dream?
I am burying my
dreams in your hearts.
I bury my dreams in the women
that I come across in my life.
I'm tired of digging the ground.
If I can bury my dreams in
your dreams, in your hearts--
>>LISA: It will grow roots.
>>TERERAI: It will grow roots.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>TERERAI: And these are
not my personal dreams
that I am bearing.
I am bearing the awakening of
women, the awakening of women,
because we hold the power to
the healing of this world.
>>LISA: You just dug that
dream so deeply in my heart.
>>TERERAI: Thank you.
>>LISA: And in the hearts
of everyone watching.
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
Thank you.
>>LISA: That is exactly
what you're doing.
With every word you speak
and every story you tell,
you're weaving that
dream into our hearts.
>>TERERAI: Yeah, yeah.
>>LISA: And we
will continue that.
How can we be of support?
Buying a necklace, but how
else can we be of support?
>>TERERAI: People can
donate to our foundation.
They can buy some
of our products.
I have the book, The
Awakened Woman book.
The proceeds from
the book, it's going
towards education for
rural women and rural girls
as well, as well as boys.
I am offering online
classes based on the book
The Awakened Woman series.
What Breaks Your Heart
is one of the courses,
Healing From Our Soul
Wounds, because I
recognize we carry soul wounds.
We carry the ugly baton.
How do we heal from
those soul wounds.
Reclaiming Your Voice.
So these are the courses that
I offer to both women and men.
>>LISA: How do you,
if you could give us
an idea of how do you heal
from those soul wounds?
>>TERERAI: You know, I
provide practical tools--
>>LISA: OK.
>>TERERAI: --in my sessions,
where you have to identify.
Because you can't heal
from what you don't know.
>>LISA: OK.
>>TERERAI: Can you
sit down and think
about the soul wounds, those
generational wounds that
had been passed to you?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>TERERAI: The
things, the wounds
that bring fear,
hesitation in our life.
When you track
those things, you'll
find there is a
grandmother, there
is a grandfather who
also went through that.
I believe in epigenetics.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>TERERAI: The trauma that
was passed from one generation
to the next, it becomes
part of our DNA.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>TERERAI: But we need
to reflect back and look
at that trauma, where
it's coming from,
what it is shaping in our lives,
confront it, write it down.
That's why I tell you
about I write every day.
I confront my fears every day.
I confront my soul
wounds every day.
And I ask myself and I am
asking to the women, what
soul wounds do you carry?
Is this what's shaping you?
>>LISA: And shaping the
lives of your children.
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
Because when we are silent about
that, we pass on that silencing
to the next generation,
to our children.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>TERERAI: So I provide
those tools for women
to really dig deep and
tap into those traumas
and then we begin
to find healing.
>>LISA: I've recently gone
through this experience of--
my father passed very
recently, and my relationship
with my mother, as a
result, is deepening.
Because she is reverting back
to every story of her childhood,
and I'm learning and unweaving
why she repeated the patterns
from her mother.
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
>>LISA: And why her mother
repeated those patterns
from her mother.
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
>>LISA: And as I'm
going through this--
you know, one would
think that this
is a time of grieving, but it's
a time of massive expansion
and learning the generations.
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
>>LISA: And then I look for--
I look at my daughter, and
I think how am I repeating--
>>TERERAI: The same pattern.
Because when you look
at those patterns--
>>LISA: Yes.
Yes.
>>TERERAI: They have shaped us.
>>LISA: They are deep.
>>TERERAI: They are deep.
>>LISA: They're deep.
>>TERERAI: But we live
in societies that are
refusing to go to that depth.
But what we are missing is
we're missing our healing.
>>LISA: We live it, though,
every day, like you did.
You coped and coped
and coped and you
found coping mechanisms.
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
>>LISA: Rarely, I
mean, this experience
of my father's
passing, he's still
helping us from
everywhere that he
is, to see this deep pattern.
>>TERERAI: Yes.
>>LISA: And to unweave
it, unravel it.
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
>>LISA: So that it
doesn't go into--
it was a pattern
of deep control.
>>TERERAI: Yes, yes.
>>LISA: Misconstrued as love.
>>TERERAI: Exactly, exactly.
Yeah.
>>LISA: And I'm looking
at that, saying, no.
I'm conscious of it.
You have to be conscious of it.
>>TERERAI: You have
to, you have to.
And you have to be able
to tell these stories.
Because when you dig deep
and tell those stories
and you look at
your own daughter
and tell her the
stories, she'll begin
to understand that this pattern
is never to be repeated.
>>LISA: You know, this is the
first time my mom's really
told the stories.
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
>>LISA: Because she's
been caring for my father
for so long and he's
been sick for so long.
And she always
had cared for him.
And so finally she
gets her voice heard.
>>TERERAI: The
awakening of her voice.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>TERERAI: Reclaiming our
voices, it's very important.
Because I always tell women
you don't claim the voice.
You already have the voice.
Somehow that voice has
been silenced because
of these generational patterns.
They silence our voice.
You need to reach a point
where you are conscious
and you reclaim that voice.
>>LISA: The experiences that you
were talking about in Africa,
have those voices being
sequestered and suppressed
carry through the world.
>>TERERAI: Oh yeah.
>>LISA: To America, which is a
young country, comparatively.
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
>>LISA: That
imprint with women--
>>TERERAI: Yeah,
it's still there.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>TERERAI: But you
know, when I talk
about the generational
curses or the wounds
that we carry and I talk about
the baton that has been passed
on from my great grandmother,
from her own people
to my mother and to me, but in
the passing of that ugly baton,
there's also the
passing of wisdom.
>>LISA: Mmm.
Interesting, yeah.
>>TERERAI: It's not
only the ugliness.
>>LISA: Right.
>>TERERAI: And we have a choice,
as women or as individuals,
to say of this ugliness--
>>LISA: Where's the wisdom.
>>TERERAI: Where's the wisdom.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>TERERAI: And carry the wisdom.
>>TERERAI: To dig
into that trauma
and to find your healing.
We are healers, as women.
>>LISA: Men too.
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
In addition to that, this
idea of bringing your dreams
to the forefront when
there doesn't appear
to be the even permission
to have a dream.
And in many
situations, for those
that don't have Oprah to
exalt our dreams, what could
you tell people whose
circumstances don't allow
for the dream, or they
wouldn't speak it,
what could you tell them to do?
>>TERERAI: You know,
for me, even when
Oprah came into my
life, I was already
on a journey for my own
redemption and my own healing,
because my grandmother
and my mother
were telling me about the
importance of owning my voice.
And my grandmother
would always say
does your voice match this
dream that you are chasing?
Does it?
So I tell women, if
you have a dream,
do you have the voice
that matches that dream?
Ask yourself.
And also, to ask yourself
what soul wounds do I carry?
Can you confront
those soul wounds?
How do they manifest
in your current life?
Are you a victim?
No.
>>LISA: And that
story, it connects
right to what you're
saying about the voice.
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
>>LISA: Are your actions--
do they match the dream?
>>TERERAI: Exactly.
Exactly.
>>LISA: Huge piece.
That's a huge piece.
>>TERERAI: You have to keep
on asking yourself every day.
>>LISA: Or are you stuck in
the story of the wounds, which
is, yes, understandable.
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
>>LISA: But are you
repeating that story
so that it will never
allow you to match
the energy of the dream?
>>TERERAI: Because it is a story
that is more comfortable to us.
It is a story that makes
us a victim, sometimes.
But we need to say
I am not a victim.
I am part of the
solution, and here
is how I want to reshape the
narrative moving forward.
And the way to
reshape that narrative
so that I define
who I am, I have
to confront the
ugliness in my own life
and be truthful about it and
start sharing these stories
to this generation.
>>LISA: That helps you match
the voice to the dream.
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
>>LISA: That is a
huge teaching moment.
You cannot create the dream
if the voice is down here.
>>TERERAI: No, you cannot.
>>LISA: You have to rise through
the journey and the stories
and the narrative to match.
>>TERERAI: Exactly.
And be authentic to it.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>TERERAI: Be vulnerable to it.
Be open to it.
There's beauty in our
own vulnerability,
when we can face it and
say this is who I am.
You know, in my culture
when we greet one another,
we say [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH],,
I see you.
And your response is,
I am here to be seen.
With all my ugliness, with all
my wounds and with all my joy,
I am here to be seen.
>>LISA: So what
do you say again?
>>TERERAI: [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH].
>>LISA: And what would
I say in your language?
>>TERERAI: [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH].
>>LISA: [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH].
I am here to be seen.
We don't want to hide from
the ugliness that we carry.
From our vulnerabilities.
>>LISA: And humbleness,
it carries a humbleness.
>>TERERAI: Exactly.
>>LISA: [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH].
>>TERERAI: [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH].
I am here to be seen.
>>LISA: I am here to be seen.
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
>>LISA: And I appreciate you.
I have to ask, for
you going forward,
and I know that it's
not an easy journey,
to carry on a foundation and
to carry through this schools.
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
>>LISA: And to carry
on the funding.
>>TERERAI: Yeah.
>>LISA: Your biggest
why, in present time.
If you could share that with
me, what is the biggest why?
What moves you every day?
>>TERERAI: Why?
The ugly baton.
That's my why.
We find redemption in
what breaks our heart.
I've been there.
I was married young.
I don't want to see anyone to
go through what I went through.
And that addresses my why.
I wake up every
day knowing I have
a moral and a sacred
responsibility.
Because my mother
said here on Earth,
we are climbing an
invisible ladder.
This ladder is so tall
but it's invisible.
It is rungs.
There are others who are
at the bottom of the rung
and there are others who
are at the top of the rung.
I am at the top of that rung.
And my mother would always
say, the invisible ladder,
it has its own invisible laws.
You have the moral obligation,
because you are there
at the top, to pull up
those who are at the bottom.
That's what makes
living beautiful for me.
That's what addresses my why.
>>LISA: Every day.
>>TERERAI: Every day.
>>LISA: I want to thank
you for being the example
of an awakened woman.
>>TERERAI: Thank
you, but I stand
on the shoulders of other women.
>>LISA: And I
honor them as well.
>>TERERAI: And
other men as well.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>TERERAI: Thank you.
Thank you.
>>LISA: Thank you
so much, and thank
you so much for sharing this
incredible moment with me
and for really
learning about what it
means to achieve your dreams.
>>TERERAI: Oh yeah.
>>LISA: [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] ?
>>TERERAI: [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH].
>>LISA: [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH].
>>TERERAI:
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] Yes.
>>LISA: Thank you.
>>TERERAI: Thank you, thank you.
>>LISA: And thank
you for watching.
If you'd like to
watch more shows,
go to "Inspirations" on Gaia.
I'm Lisa Garr, and as always,
I invite you to stay awakened.
[MUSIC PLAYING]